JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
AUDIE CORNISH: And I'm Audie
Cornish.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I listened to a bunch of stuff
last night
on television that was
disgraceful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
defends his
immigration ban, as its fate
hangs in the
balance of the courts.
AUDIE CORNISH: Also ahead, Judy
sits down
with House Speaker Paul Ryan to
talk about
how he is working with the Trump
White House,
and the fight over immigration.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: This
isn't a Muslim ban.
If it were, I would be opposed
to it, but
the rhetoric surrounding it
makes it look
like a ban on a religion or a
religious test.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And debate over
one of the
president's Cabinet picks leads
to a rare
vote in the Senate to silence
Democratic opposition.
We talk with Senator Elizabeth
Warren about
the decision.
AUDIE CORNISH: Plus: After
doctors told her
she had just a few months to
live, how one
woman fought her cancer by
betting on a novel
treatment.
MELINDA WELSH, Cancer Sufferer:
I think it
actually took a day or two to
fully sink in
that my calendar had expanded.
Instead of the coming demise
that we expected,
I was feeling fine.
And the cancer was retreating.
AUDIE CORNISH: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm joined again
tonight by
Audie Cornish of NPR's "All
Things Considered."
Welcome, Audie.
AUDIE CORNISH: Thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the legal
fight over President
Trump's seven-country travel ban
remains unresolved
tonight.
A trio of federal appeals court
judges spent
this day considering whether to
uphold a district
court judge in Seattle who
blocked the order
last Friday.
Meanwhile, the president wasn't
holding back.
John Yang reports from the White
House.
JOHN YANG: Today, President
Trump escalated
his war of words with the
federal judges considering
challenges to his immigration
order.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
I don't ever want to call a
court biased,
so I won't call it biased.
But courts seem to be so
political, and it
would be so great for our
justice system if
they would be able to read a
statement and
do what's right.
JOHN YANG: What's right, both
Mr. Trump and
Justice Department lawyers say,
is that immigration
law gives the president the
authority to bar
any foreign citizen from
entering the United
States if it's in the national
interest.
DONALD TRUMP: You don't have to
be a lawyer.
If you were a good student in
high school
or bad student in high school,
you can understand
this.
And it's really incredible to me
that we have
a court case that is going on so
long.
JOHN YANG: Two state attorneys
general say
the order is unconstitutional
because it discriminates
against Muslims.
The president said they don't
realize the
risk to the nation's safety.
DONALD TRUMP: I think our
security is at risk
today, and it will be at risk
until such time
as we are entitled and get what
we are entitled
to as citizens of this country.
I have learned a lot in the last
two weeks.
And terrorism is a far greater
threat than
people of our country
understand.
But we're going to take care of
it.
We're going to win.
We're going to take care of it,
folks.
JOHN YANG: Hours later, he
followed up with
a tweet: "Big increase in
traffic into our
country from certain areas,
while our people
are far more vulnerable."
At a House Democratic retreat in
Baltimore,
Leader Nancy Pelosi called the
president's
order dangerous and immoral.
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
As long as the president
continues down this
path, there's nothing Democrats
can work with
him on.
To protect the security of our
nation, to
future of our working families,
and the sanctity
of our Constitution, Democrats
will fight
this administration every day,
with every
fiber of our being.
JOHN YANG: Also today, an Oval
Office announcement
the White House says advances
another signature
campaign promise: creating U.S.
jobs.
Standing next to the president,
Intel chairman
Brian Krzanich announced plans
to build a
$7 billion factory in Phoenix,
which he said
would create up to 10,000 new
jobs.
White House officials said the
plant had been
in the works for four years.
BRIAN KRZANICH, CEO, Intel: It's
really in
support of the tax and
regulatory policies
that we see the administration
pushing forward,
that really make it advantageous
to do manufacturing
in the U.S.
JOHN YANG: Krzanich opposes the
immigration
order, but White House officials
said it didn't
come up in his meeting with Mr.
Trump.
Mr. Trump's attacks on federal
judges has
now drawn a response from his
own Supreme
Court nominee.
An administration official who's
working on
the confirmation process
confirms that in
a meeting on Capitol Hill with
the senator,
Neil Gorsuch said that the
attacks are demoralizing
and disheartening.
And Mr. Trump also took to
Twitter to attack
Nordstrom, the retailer, for
dropping his
daughter Ivanka's fashion line.
They cited poor sales for that
decision.
He said on Twitter that they
treated her unfairly.
Asked about the propriety of a
president supporting
or getting involved in a child's
private business
affairs, White House Press
Secretary Sean
Spicer was said that Mr. Trump
as a father
was within his rights to stand
up for his
family -- Judy.
AUDIE CORNISH: In the day's
other news, the
Senate wrapped up an all-night
and all-day
debate to confirm Jeff Sessions
as attorney
general.
Democrats argued that the
Republican senator
from Alabama is too close to
President Trump
and is hostile to minorities.
Republicans defended him as a
man of integrity.
We will look at the confirmation
fight later
in the program.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This was the
first day on the
job for Betsy DeVos as the U.S.
secretary
of education, and she used it to
try to rally
the troops.
It took a tie-breaking vote by
Vice President
Pence yesterday to get DeVos
confirmed.
The Michigan billionaire faced
criticism over
her lack of experience with
public schools.
Today, she appealed to
department staffers
for unity.
BETSY DEVOS, U.S. Education
Secretary: Let
us set aside any preconceived
notions and
let's recognize that while we
may have disagreements,
we can and must come together,
find common
ground, and put the needs of
students first.
And when we do disagree, let's
set an example
by being sincere and honest,
passionate, but
civil.
JUDY WOODRUFF: DeVos has
championed charter
schools and other alternatives
to public education.
AUDIE CORNISH: In Afghanistan,
an ambush by
suspected Islamic State
militants ended in
the deaths of six Afghan workers
for the International
Red Cross.
The Red Cross team was trying to
deliver supplies
to a northern town paralyzed by
snowstorms.
After the attack, the agency
suspended operations
in Afghanistan.
MAN: It was a region we knew
very well, and
it's really very experienced
colleagues.
And then knowing that they have
been killed,
attacked directly, is the worst
possible news.
And, of course, the shock is
first to realize
what it means for our actions in
Afghanistan,
what it means for Afghans, for
the family,
for the colleagues.
AUDIE CORNISH: The Taliban
denied it had anything
to do with the attack, and
promised to help
find those responsible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A United Nations
report warns
that more than 120,000 people in
Nigeria will
likely face "catastrophic
famine" this summer.
More than half live in Borno
state, where
the Islamist militant group Boko
Haram has
disrupted food supplies.
Overall, the U.N.'s Food and
Agriculture Organization
says 11 million Nigerians face
severe food
shortages in a nation of more
than 170 million.
AUDIE CORNISH: Once again, a
Russian court
has found opposition leader
Alexei Navalny
guilty of fraud.
An earlier conviction had been
overturned
by the European Court of Human
Rights.
This new decision formally
disqualifies Navalny
as a candidate for president
next year.
He says the Kremlin engineered
the verdict
to sabotage his bid.
ALEXEI NAVALNY, Russian
Opposition Leader
(through translator): What we
saw now is a
sort of telegram which was sent
from the Kremlin,
saying that they believe that
the people whose
views I voice are too dangerous
to allow us
to take part in the election
campaign.
Nevertheless, we don't recognize
this ruling.
I have every right to take part
in the election,
according to the constitution,
and I will
do so.
AUDIE CORNISH: Navalny was
convicted for the
embezzlement of $270,000 worth
of timber.
He was given a five-year
suspended sentence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, a North
Carolina court temporarily
blocked a state
law that stripped the new
Democratic governor
of some of his powers.
The Republican-controlled
legislature passed
the measure after the November
election.
It requires state Senate
confirmation for
Cabinet members.
The court still has to rule on
the merits
of the law itself.
AUDIE CORNISH: Former Republican
Secretary
of State James Baker went to the
White House
today.
He wants the administration to
embrace a carbon
tax to combat climate change.
Baker and another former
secretary of state,
George Shultz, wrote in The Wall
Street Journal
-- quote -- "There is mounting
evidence of
problems with the atmosphere
that are growing
too compelling to ignore."
Other former Reagan and Bush
administration
officials back the idea, but
it's not clear
Republicans in Congress will
join them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On Wall Street
today, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost
about 36 points
to close at 20054.
The Nasdaq rose eight points,
and the S&P
500 added one point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
my interview
with House Speaker Paul Ryan;
Senator Elizabeth
Warren on recent clashes over
the president's
Cabinet picks; using the body's
natural immune
system to fight cancer; and much
more.
Now to my interview with the
speaker of the
House of Representatives, Paul
Ryan.
We sat down at the Capitol.
And I began by asking about his
relationship
with President Trump, after some
tension during
the campaign.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: We're
doing fine.
We're getting along very well,
speak fairly
frequently.
Mike is coming up for lunch
today.
So, we have spent a lot of time
together coordinating
our strategy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The vice
president.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, the vice
president.
So, we get along very well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you speak
often, but do
they consult you not just on the
routine things
like the legislative calendar,
but, for example,
did you know ahead of time about
the immigration
ban?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: On that one, I
didn't.
But we have decided, on a
go-forward basis,
that we are going to have more
consulting
and make sure that no one's
caught by surprise
on things.
We have basically mapped out
what 2017 looks
like from a legislative
perspective.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Already?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Absolutely.
That's what you do when you're
running a legislature.
You plan your year.
And so Senator McConnell and I
walked the
president through basically what
we see 2017
looking like.
And there is a lot of
deadline-driven events,
statutory deadlines that you
have to meet.
And then there are plenty of
other priorities
that we're working on.
And so just that planning
process gets you
talking about the big issues,
the big picture
and all the things we're trying
to get done
and when we're trying to get
them done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I want to
stay with the
immigration ban for just a
moment, because
former CIA Director Michael
Hayden, whom you
know...
REP.
PAUL RYAN: I know Mike well,
yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... joined a
legal brief with
a number of other national
security experts
in saying that they not only
don't think this
is going to make the United
States safer,
they don't see a threat from
these seven countries,
but they think it could make the
country less
safe, because it is going to be
easier to
attract people who want to work
with terrorist
groups against the U.S., to say
the U.S. is
anti-Muslim.
(CROSSTALK)
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes.
I think the rhetoric is
damaging, no two ways
about it.
Let's back up for a second.
After the Paris shooting, we
brought the Department
of Homeland Security and FBI up
to Capitol
Hill to say, what is happening?
Could this happen here?
Because, if you remember, at the
Paris shooting,
there was an infiltration of
ISIS among the
Syrian refugee population into
Europe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it turned out
there were
not refugees involved.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: But that was the
issue at the time.
And so what Homeland Security
and the FBI
told us was, they can't vet
these people.
There -- there isn't a Siri (ph)
to talk to,
to vet these people.
And so what we discovered was,
there was a
hole in the vetting process to
guard against
people trying to infiltrate the
refugee population.
And so that is why we passed
legislation then
about a year ago.
The bill passed the House, but
it got filibustered
in the Senate.
So it never actually went into
law.
So, we have been long on record
on a bipartisan
basis that we need to get these
vetting standards
right and we need to take a
pause in these
programs to make sure that we
have the vetting
standards right.
The reason these seven
countries, which were
identified by the Obama
administration, are
listed is because we have a hard
time corroborating
the veracity of people's claims
coming from
those countries.
Those countries in particular,
we have a hard
time discerning who exactly
these people are
that are coming into the
country.
That is why it's totally
reasonable and rational
to have a pause in this program,
so that we
can update and upgrade our
vetting standards,
so that we can be better secured
to make sure
that we don't have somebody
trying to infiltrate
the network.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But there haven't
been terrorist
incidents perpetrated by people
from these
countries.
I mean, that's...
REP.
PAUL RYAN: From these countries
or from -- through
the refugee population?
From these countries,
absolutely, from the
refugee population.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: But the point is we
know that ISIS
is trying to infiltrate refugee
populations.
That is intelligence that has
already been
unclassified.
So, the question is, are we
doing everything
we need to guard against that?
The point -- I think you made a
good point,
though, which is, this isn't a
Muslim ban.
If it were, I would be opposed
to it.
But the rhetoric surrounding it
makes it look
like it's a ban on a religion or
a religious
test.
And I think that rhetoric is
inflammatory
and doesn't help us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that raises
the question,
because the president himself
and others around
him have talked about -- they
have talked
about their preference for a
Muslim ban.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, and I disagree
with that.
I disagree with that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are you confident
that there
will not...
REP.
PAUL RYAN: I disagree with it
now and I disagreed
with it then.
But that's not what this is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I understand
that.
But my question is, are you
confident this
administration is not going in
the direction
ever of a Muslim ban?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, because we will
-- we will
-- I and many others around here
would oppose
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A little bit more
about your
relationship with the White
House.
We know that you are good
friends with fellow
Wisconsinite Chief of Staff
Reince Priebus.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: He's my constituent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right.
My question is, how is your
relationship with
Steve Bannon, who, when he was
at Breitbart
News, took a special interest in
you, called
you the enemy after you became
speaker?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, I don't really
know him.
I have gotten to know him two or
three times.
We have had a few meetings.
We have gotten along fine.
He's not someone I have a
history with.
Obviously, I didn't know him
when he was opposing
me all those times.
We're different kinds of
conservatives.
That's something I can safely
say, I think.
But we're serving a purpose,
which is to get
this agenda passed.
And on this agenda that we have
rolled out,
that we ran on, on that, we
agree.
So I see a person in which I
have a common
cause and purpose with.
We're different kinds of
conservatives.
We really don't know each other,
but we're
all trying to get this agenda
enacted.
And that's why I don't see a
problem here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Russia.
You have said on a number of
occasions you
want to see the sanctions
against Russia continued.
President Trump, though, has
made some not
just conciliatory, but even
complimentary
comments in the last few days
about President
Putin.
Were you shocked by that?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, I just don't see
it that way.
I just see it differently.
I think, first of all, I don't
subscribe to
relativism, whether it's in
political philosophy,
foreign policy or in life.
So, I don't think there is a
moral equivalency
here at all.
So, I just disagree with any
kind of notion
of a moral equivalency.
There's a gaping difference
between the United
States of America and Putin's
Russia.
That's point number one.
Point number two, I think what
the president
is trying to do is not unlike
what the past
two presidents did with Russia.
I just don't think it's going to
work.
Remember when George W. Bush
said I could
see through his soul or
something like that?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Trying to get
close to Russia.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, he was trying to
get close
to Russia and trying to get
close to Putin.
George Bush did that.
I don't think it worked.
Remember Hillary Clinton with
the reset button
on behalf of Barack Obama,
trying to get close
to Russia, trying to smooth
things out with
Russia?
New administrations do this.
Now, it's logical as to why they
want to do
this.
There are instances in which our
interests
align with Russia and there are
those where
they don't.
And so the question is, can we
help steer
Russia to being something that
doesn't conflict
with our interests and something
that -- and
a country that aligns with our
interests?
I don't personally -- I'm not
going to hold
my breath on that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if this
president were
to relax sanctions against
Russia...
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, I don't support
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... would you
support legislation
to prevent it?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, no, I think the
advantages
were overdue.
I think President Obama should
have done them
a year ago.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you would
support legislation
to keep them strong?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, I do support --
yes, I have
long supported sanctions on
Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Turning domestic,
to a subject
that I think is close to your
heart, tax reform.
It has been your top legislative
agenda.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, you see the
smile?
I just -- I love the issue of
tax reform.
We haven't done it since 1986.
So, we think it's a
once-in-a-generation
opportunity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, here we are,
however many
years that is later, 31 years.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, I got my
driver's license
the last year we did tax reform.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Will the
individual and the
corporate tax cuts that you're
interested
in the House passing be
permanent?
And will these cuts be
revenue-neutral or
will they require offsets?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes and yes.
Well, to be revenue-neutral,
they will require
offsets.
So, we're planning
revenue-neutral tax reform,
which means you have to take
away loopholes
and special interest deductions
if you're
going to lower tax rates.
That's clearly what we're
working on doing.
That's what the House blueprint
that we ran
on does do.
It does affect both what we call
the individual
side of the tax code and the
business side
of the tax code.
And we propose it on a
revenue-neutral basis.
And we also propose permanent
tax reform.
When we did the 2001 and 2003
tax cuts in
the Bush administration, those
were only individual
tax cuts, which you can actually
make those
temporary.
You can't do that on the
business side of
the code.
It actually doesn't work.
It produces a lot of uncertainty
for businesses.
You can't completely redesign
the budget tax
system for nine-and-a-half
years, and then
flip it back in 10 years.
It doesn't work like that.
So, it has to be permanent.
So, we do envision
revenue-neutral tax reform
that is permanent.
With good comprehensive
across-the-board tax
reform, we really believe we can
get the kind
of economic growth we need which
will solve
so many problems we have in this
country.
And fundamental tax reform is
critical, because
now we have the worst tax code
in the industrialized
world, bar none.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, no domestic
spending cuts?
I ask because a Republican study
group last
year was talking about $7.5
trillion in spending
cuts for 10 years.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: That's to balance the
budget.
That's not to pay for tax
reform.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I understand.
But the public, the voters are
going to look
at this as connected.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, we have a budget
problem,
which is, we have a big budget
deficit.
And we have a debt crisis in the
future because
of spending.
So you have to reduce spending
and reform
the spending programs in and of
themselves.
Put tax reform aside.
There's no way -- it's
mathematical.
We are not going to be able to
raise the kind
of tax revenues to chase the
kind of spending
that is coming in the future.
So you have to get spending
under control
if you're going to avert a debt
crisis down
the road.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Affordable
Care Act, you
have committed to repealing,
replacing Obamacare.
One of your colleagues,
Congressman Jim Jordan,
has said -- and I'm quoting him
-- "It's so
bad."
He said, Congress has to get rid
of -- quote
-- "every bit of it, every tax,
every regulation,
every mandate.
It all has to be eliminated."
Given that view, which a lot of
Republicans
share, would any piece of the
current Affordable
Care Act stand?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, so the reason
Jim Jordan says
that is because the architecture
is just so
wrong.
So, I think that was in reaction
to some suggesting
that we should sort of tinker
around the edges
and try and refine and repair
the existing
law.
It is collapsing.
And that's not viable.
And so what we propose -- and we
ran on a
replacement plan, by the way.
So we have had a -- long had a
replacement
plan for Obamacare.
And that's exactly what we're
focused on right
now is building a replacement
plan, so we
repeal Obamacare and replace it
with patient-centered
health care, which we are
convinced will give
us a better system at the end of
the day.
Remember the promises of
Obamacare, lower
prices, more choices.
Those things didn't happen.
We believe we can make good on
those kind
of promises, which is improve
access to affordable
health care coverage.
Right now, people aren't getting
affordable
health care coverage.
And so we really do believe, to
get this right,
you have to repeal and replace
this law with
something better.
And that's exactly what we ran
on in 2016.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Including
preexisting conditions
are covered?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Absolutely, yes.
We have long supported...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Not something
called continuous
coverage, which isn't the same
thing?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: No, no, there's
different ways
of achieving preexisting
conditions reform.
We think Obamacare went about it
the exact
wrong way to guarantee that
people with preexisting
conditions can get good
affordable coverage.
The goal here is, can people
with preexisting
-- can a woman who got breast
cancer when
she was 45 still afford her
health insurance?
That's a goal we absolutely
share.
And we think there is a better
way of achieving
that goal than Obamacare, which
just so you
know, Judy, five states only
have one plan
left to choose from.
One out of three counties in
America have
only one plan to choose from.
Those are monopolies.
Seventy percent of counties in
America have
one or two plans to choose from.
Those are duopolies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're
also...
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Massive price
increases, massive
deductible increases.
The law is collapsing while we
speak.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have talked
about a split
between -- a trillion-dollar
infrastructure
split between the federal
government and the
private sector.
What would the split be?
Are we looking at a 50/50?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, I don't know the
answer to
that.
That's something we would have
to develop.
We have asked our Transportation
Committees.
We have Elaine Chao, who just
got sworn in
as secretary of transportation,
who has a
long history and experience in
transportation,
to figure out how best we can
maximize private
sector dollars and leverage
private sector
dollars with public money to get
the best
bang for our buck on building
out our infrastructure.
And so that's something that
we're trying
to figure out how best we can do
for part
of our legislative agenda later
this summer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But to the extent
you're counting
on the private sector to get
involved, it's
known -- we talk to the experts
-- they say
private businesspeople don't get
involved
in something like this unless
there is an
incentive, that they get some
tax breaks.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: That's right,
absolutely.
That's what we believe.
We believe, instead of just
having a dollar
of taxpayer money go to pay for
a dollar of
road construction, why don't we
take a dollar
of taxpayer money to try and
leverage many
dollars of private sector money,
so we have
more money, federal, you know,
taxpayer money,
private sector money combined,
so that we
have even more impact on
upgrading and modernizing
our infrastructure?
The point is, how much bang for
our buck can
we get to have the best impact
on modernizing
American infrastructure?
That's what we're trying to
figure out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A couple of
questions about
you in this position.
Michael Gerson, conservative
thinker, writer...
REP.
PAUL RYAN: We used to work
together for Jack
Kemp.
He's an old friend of mine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's right.
That's right.
Admires you, has written
positively about
you for years.
He wrote yesterday that, with
your acceptance
of President Trump, he said you
have embraced
what he calls a Faustian bargain
with open
eyes, he said, a chance to enact
legislation
important to you, as long as you
occasionally
ignore your conscience.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Oh, I -- that's just
a bunch of
bull.
First of all, acceptance.
The man got elected president of
the United
States.
We live in a constitutional
republic.
So, what's the suggestion here,
that we should
just ignore democracy, ignore
the will of
the people, ignore the Electoral
College,
and not work with who was
elected president?
I worked with the last
president, Barack Obama.
I didn't agree with him on much,
but I worked
with him.
Now I have a president who
agrees with and
embraces the agenda that we ran
on in 2016,
who gives us a great chance of
fixing really
big problems in America.
Have we seen eye to eye on
everything over
the last year?
Of course not.
No two people do.
But -- so I just -- I reject the
premise of
this notion that the head of the
legislative
branch of government should just
reject the
duly elected head of the
executive branch
of government.
That makes no sense to me.
I think what people want to see
happen in
government is people work
together to solve
problems.
People work together to iron out
their differences,
to make good on making a
difference in people's
lives and fix this country's
problems.
That is what I believe I was
elected to do.
And that's what I'm doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What came through
to me in
what Michael Gerson wrote was
that he doesn't
sense that you're standing up to
this president
on things that he thought,
Michael Gerson
thought you believed in.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: I'm just not going to
comment on
the tweet of the hour, the
comment of the
day.
I'm focused on getting an agenda
done.
I'm focused on making Congress
work.
I'm focused on making good on
our promises
that we made when we ran that
I'm trying to
implement now that we have --
now that the
election is over.
So I'm just not going to spend
my days focusing
on things that are outside of my
control as
speaker of the House.
I'm going to focus on my days
focusing on
making progress on the issues
that care to
people and not on the random
comment of the
day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In connection
with that, your
great mentor was the late
congressman, New
York Congressman Jack Kemp,
described himself
as a big-tent Republican.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot of people
look at Donald
Trump, they don't see a big-tent
Republican.
How do you reconcile?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Yes, well, I think he
is.
He's just a different kind of a
big-tent Republican.
I am more of the Jack Kemp
aspirational, inclusive.
I believe in the Kempian
philosophy and the
style of politics.
But Donald Trump brought a whole
bunch of
blue-collar -- I can tell you,
just in Wisconsin,
just the numbers, he won
Wisconsin for the
first time since 1984.
That's expanding the Republican
tent.
He won Michigan, Pennsylvania,
Wisconsin.
That's expanding the Republican
tent.
We used to call them Reagan
Democrats.
Now they're Trump Democrats.
These are people I grew up with,
went to high
school with, worked at the GM
plant that's
gone now in Janesville,
blue-collar, union
households that just now voted
for a Republican
for president.
That's expanding the tent, I
would say.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, the only
thing that
I am told that Paul Ryan of
Wisconsin might
like as much as tax cuts and the
Republican
Party is the Green Bay Packers.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, after the
Sunday Super
Bowl...
REP.
PAUL RYAN: I'm one of the team
owners.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, after the
Sunday Super
Bowl, do you now acknowledge
that...
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Oh, you're going to
put me in this
position.
This is the hardest question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tom Brady, best
NFL quarterback
ever?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Look, the Lombardi
Trophy is what
you get.
I will concede that Bill
Belichick is probably
the best coach ever.
Brady and Rodgers aren't done
with their careers
yet.
So, ask me when the two of them
are done with
their careers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're not
ready to concede
that?
REP.
PAUL RYAN: I'm not ready to
concede, because
neither of them are done with
their careers.
But I will concede Belichick.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Speaker of the
House Paul Ryan,
thank you.
REP.
PAUL RYAN: Thank you, Judy.
AUDIE CORNISH: Moving over to
the Senate,
where the debate over the
nomination of Jeff
Sessions ran deep into the night
and partisan
tensions spilled over.
Lisa Desjardins starts us off.
MAN: The senator from
Massachusetts.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN (D),
Massachusetts: Thank
you, Mr. President.
LISA DESJARDINS: She was midway
through her
speech opposing attorney general
nominee Jeff
Sessions.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: Coretta Scott
King also
wrote to the Judiciary Committee
about the
Sessions nomination in 1986.
LISA DESJARDINS: When
Massachusetts Senator
Elizabeth Warren turned to a
decades-old letter
by the widow of Martin Luther
King Jr., opposing
Sessions' nomination to a
judgeship.
Mrs. King called his record on
race at that
point, reprehensible.
Warren read out loud:
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: "Mr. Sessions
has used the
awesome power of his office to
chill the free
exercise of the vote by black
citizens in
the district he now seeks to
serve as a federal
judge.
This simply cannot be allowed to
happen."
LISA DESJARDINS: Warren was
interrupted multiple
times.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: ...
enforcement of those
laws.
MAN: The senator is reminded
that is a violation
of Rule 19.
LISA DESJARDINS: Told she'd
broken a rule.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: I ask leave of
the Senate
to continue my remarks.
MAN: Is there objection?
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: I
object.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: I appeal the
ruling.
MAN: Objection is heard.
The senator will take her seat.
LISA DESJARDINS: The
rarely-invoked rule bans
senators from criticizing one
another directly
in the chamber.
Republican Leader Mitch
McConnell:
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL: The senator has
impugned
the motive and conduct of our
colleague from
Alabama.
LISA DESJARDINS: Now, this led
to an unusual
vote over whether to silence
Warren.
She lost, and now cannot speak
again during
Sessions' confirmation debate.
Senator McConnell later told
reporters -- quote
-- "She was warned.
She was given an explanation.
Nevertheless, she persisted."
It is a time of rancor.
That rare vote to silence a
sitting senator
came as Democrats have forced
two overnight
debates in a row.
It is their protest of Trump's
nominees.
And those overnights may
continue into the
weekend.
President Trump weighed in on it
all last
night on Twitter.
He tweeted: "It is a disgrace
that my full
Cabinet is still not in place."
Trump's critics point out,
several of his
nominees didn't complete their
paperwork quickly.
Labor nominee Andrew Puzder
submitted his
final ethics documents to a
committee today.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins
at the U.S. Capitol.
AUDIE CORNISH: I spoke with
Senator Elizabeth
Warren a short time ago to get
her take on
the 11th-hour drama in the
Senate.
I began by asking if she
believed Jeff Sessions
would use his power as attorney
general to
work against minority voters.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: What I know is
what Jeff
Sessions has actually done, and
I think it
is an important part of the
record.
I was shut down for saying
exactly that sentence,
repeating it out of Coretta
Scott King's letter.
But I urge everybody, read the
whole letter,
because what it talks about is,
when Jeff
Sessions was U.S. attorney for
Alabama, he
prosecuted civil rights workers
for doing
what?
For trying to help elderly
African-Americans
vote.
And when he came up then for a
federal judgeship,
both Senator Ted Kennedy and
Coretta Scott
King said no.
And Coretta Scott King sent a
letter to the
United States Senate, which was
Republican-controlled,
and ultimately that
Republican-controlled
Senate said no to his nomination
to the federal
bench.
And I assume at least part of
the reason for
that was the information
contained in Coretta
Scott King's letter.
AUDIE CORNISH: But the
Republican-led Senate
right now is planning to say
yes, right?
This is the discussion you're
locked out of.
What aspect of the attorney
general's power
do you think that Jeff Sessions
could use
against the voters?
What are you most concerned
about?
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: I'm concerned
about every
part of it.
The attorney general, as the
ultimate law
enforcement official in the
United States,
is the one who decides whether
or not you
prosecute violations of the
Voting Rights
Act.
He is the one who ultimately
will have the
word on how our immigration laws
are carried
out.
He's the one who will make the
decision whether
or not the Justice Department is
there for
African-Americans, whether it's
Latinos, whether it's there for
women, whether
it's there for people whose
rights are being
violated, or whether it's a
Justice Department
who just stands on the side of
the rich and
the powerful.
AUDIE CORNISH: Now, recently
speaking before
progressive activists in
Baltimore, you said
that Democrats who are focused
on just kind
of changing the party message
need to grow
a backbone.
What do you mean by that and are
you seeing
them grow that backbone now?
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: Look, I think
we have to
get out and fight for what we
believe in.
I get it.
We don't have the tools in the
Senate to be
able to stop the nomination of
Jeff Sessions
to be the attorney general,
unless we can
get some help from the
Republicans.
We don't have the tools to be
able to stop
someone like Betsy DeVos, who
doesn't believe
in public education, to become
the secretary
of education.
And I could continue to go
through the list.
So, what we have got to do is,
we have got
to get in there and make our
case.
We have got to make our case for
the fact
that, you know, I get it that
Donald Trump
and I are not of the same party,
we don't
see the world the same way.
But he is not nominating people
who are just
conservative Republicans.
He's going out to the way
fringes.
He's bringing in someone to run
the EPA who
doesn't believe in climate
change, someone
to run the Treasury Department
who made money
by foreclosing against families
who had been
cheated on mortgages.
We have got to make our case.
And, ultimately, this one's
going to be about
democracy, getting enough people
around this
country to say, I'm watching, I
care what
happens in Washington, and I'm
going to be
pushing back on any of my
senators, any of
my representatives, and on the
president of
the United States if they do not
represent
the values of the people of this
country.
AUDIE CORNISH: What do you think
the next
step should be?
There are going to be votes on
Tom Price to
be health and human services
secretary, Steve
Mnuchin, as you mentioned, for
Treasury.
As you said, the Democrats can't
stop these
nominee from going forward.
What do you have in the power --
in the way
of oversight to effectively
watch over these
people that you have really
raised the alarm
about?
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: Well, part of
it is why
I wanted everyone to read
Coretta Scott King's
letter.
It's a deeply moving letter.
It lays out the facts about Jeff
Sessions,
but it also reminds us of a
moment in history
when people came together and
said, I don't
care how many times you knock us
down, we're
going to get back up and we're
going to fight
for what is right, we're going
to change this
wasn't country into a better
country, a country
that works not just for those at
the top,
a country that works for all of
us.
I think that's what we have to
do now.
That's what we're called on to
do, to use
every possible tool that we can
to do that.
And that means, for example,
with Jeff Sessions.
Right now, I hope everyone will
go read her
letter.
I put it on my Facebook.
I tweeted about it.
But I hope that, even if the
Republicans lock
arms and go ahead and confirm
him as attorney
general of the United States,
that everybody
stays involved, that we are
there every day
to look over his shoulder, to
look at every
judgment made by the Department
of Justice
and make sure that this
government works,
not just for those who have
already made it,
but this government works for
everybody.
AUDIE CORNISH: Democrat and
Massachusetts
Senator Elizabeth Warren, thank
you for speaking
with us.
SEN.
ELIZABETH WARREN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
massive crack
in an ice shelf forces Antarctic
researchers
to evacuate.
But first: the emerging field of
immunotherapy,
and its potential to help fight
cancer in
some patients.
Hari Sreenivasan has a
conversation about
its promise and limits in a
minute.
We begin with the story of a
cancer patient
who was told at one point that
she only had
six months to live.
She has now lived several years
beyond that,
thanks to her novel treatment.
Those kind of treatments are the
focus of
our weekly segment, the Leading
Edge.
MELINDA WELSH, Cancer Sufferer:
My name is
Melinda Welsh.
I'm a writer, and was editor of
The Sacramento
News and Review for around 25
years.
And when I was diagnosed with
cancer, it just
came naturally, I guess, to
write about it.
It was shocking to hear.
I felt stunned.
It is squamous cell carcinoma.
And after we learned that the
cancer had metastasized,
we went to see some specialists.
I asked each of them how much
time I had left,
and that's when they told me,
you know, six
to nine months, months to a
year, a year-ish.
You know, I started writing
again, and I felt
I had something to say that
might mean something
to other people because of the
lessons I was
learning facing death.
"The enormity of the news didn't
sink in fully,
not at first, even after my
doctor uttered
the words, 'I'm sorry, we did
find cancer.'
I have turned my attention to
the question,
how do I best spend the time
that I have left?
My answer is writing, family and
friends,
the pleasures of small things.
I was told, don't skip dessert,
so we don't.
We have taken to getting up a
few early mornings
a week and driving out to see
the sunrise
over the flatlands of our mostly
rural county."
I can't believe this.
It is going to be a great day.
"I will take solace in the idea
that, once
gone, I may come to occupy a
small space in
the hearts of the people who
loved me most,
and perhaps from there, I will
be the source
of a few simple reminders: Time
is limited,
life is miraculous, and we are
beautiful."
I always loved my life.
I felt very lucky, my meeting up
with Dave,
my love of my life, best friend.
So, having cancer, it just made
me want my
life, but more so.
After that first piece was
published, we had
a breakthrough.
I started immunotherapy.
And Dr. Algazi, who is our -- my
oncologist,
surprises us by showing up in
the infusion
room.
And he says, "I just talked to
the radiologist.
The neck tumor has vanished.
And so have the other tumors."
DR.
ALAIN ALGAZI, Skin Cancer
Specialist: My name
is Alain Algazi.
I'm an oncologist.
I specialize in head, neck
cancer, and melanoma.
I work at the University of
California, San
Francisco.
Melinda presented with squamous
cell cancer
in a lymph node.
It was metastatic, but she was
diagnosed at
a time when we had access to
several new drugs.
And those drugs turn the immune
cells back
on that are in the tumor, and
allow them to
fight more effectively against
the cancer.
So, basically, they're taking
your native
immune response and enhancing
it.
So, we caused the tumors to
regress and go
away.
MELINDA WELSH: I think it
actually took a
day or two to fully sink in that
my calendar
had expanded.
Instead of the coming demise
that we expected,
I was feeling fine, and the
cancer was retreating.
So, on the anniversary of all
the doctors
giving me a year to live, it was
time to write
part two.
"In the weeks that followed my
public coming
out about the grim news, a
benevolent tidal
wave of comments and e-mails
washed over me
from friends, co-workers and
many thousands
of strangers.
Now when I run into friends on
the streets
of my town, they hug me and tell
me I look
great.
But I can see it in their eyes;
what they
really want to say is, aren't
you dead yet?
"Well, no.
As it turns out, I became a
terminal cancer
patient at a time of sea change
in research
on the disease.
What changed?
Immunotherapy, a new set of
medicines that
help patients like me use our
bodies' natural
defenses to fight cancer."
DR.
ALAIN ALGAZI: Basically, there
are brake pedals
on immune cells, so when you
turn off the
brake pedal, you allow the
immune system to
function, you allow it to fight.
But I think the cancer is always
there, and
it's a battle between the immune
system and
the cancer.
MELINDA WELSH: "Nobody knows how
long the
good news will last for me or
other cancer
patients who are responding to
immunotherapy.
Like me they probably feel a
miraculous gift
-- unanticipated time of unknown
duration
-- has been dropped into their
laps."
DR.
ALAIN ALGAZI: It's like working
for NASA in
the 1960s.
You know, can you imagine?
That sense of discovery, that
sense that you're
changing the world, or at least
there while
the world is changing, and
you're able to
really help.
MELINDA WELSH: Unfortunately,
many people
have cancers that there's no
immunotherapy
for, they can't get access to
trials.
The drugs are very expensive.
Also, a lot of people who do
qualify for immunotherapy
simply don't respond.
DR.
ALAIN ALGAZI: Melinda is, in a
sense, an example
of both the potential and the
limitation.
We have seen so much progress
with her with
immune therapy.
But the cancer didn't go away.
What we're trying to do is
increase the chances
that you're going to stay in
remission indefinitely.
A few years ago, she wouldn't
survive.
Now she might survive.
We don't know what's going to
happen for certain,
but there's this enormous
potential.
MELINDA WELSH: We don't want to
hope for too
much.
We don't want to go into denial
that I have
got this deadly disease that's
trying to kill
me.
I do.
But I'm making milestones that I
didn't think
I would make.
I didn't think I would be alive
to reach my
60th birthday.
I didn't think I would make it
to my 35th
wedding anniversary, which is
coming in April,
and I'm assuming I will still be
here.
I want to live fully in the
present.
At the same time, just a little
bit of future
is awfully wonderful mixed in
with that.
DR.
ALAIN ALGAZI: People come to me,
and they
have low expectations.
People think, I'm going to die.
And my thought is, it doesn't
have to be that
way.
We have now ways of keeping
people well, not
just for a few months, but for
potentially
years.
So this is a time of hope.
MELINDA WELSH: "I am still
coming to terms
as best I can with my own
unequivocal transience.
But, no, I'm not dead yet.
When people are surprised to see
me, I tell
them I'm among the early
fortunate.
Facing death on a close horizon
has heightened
my awareness that our time on
Earth is finite.
But quite unexpectedly, it has
also made me
a living, breathing
advertisement for humanity's
hopeful new edge on cancer."
HARI SREENIVASAN: That was
Melinda Welsh with
her story.
Let's get a broader look at what
these treatments
may offer and their limits.
Jeffrey Bluestone is a leading
researcher
in this field.
He is the president and CEO of
the Parker
Institute for Cancer
Immunotherapy.
He's also a professor of
metabolism and endocrinology
at the University of California,
San Francisco,
School of Medicine.
And Matt Richtel is a science
writer who has
covered this extensively for The
New York
Times.
Mr. Bluestone, I want to start
with you before
all of our viewers start to call
their oncologists
if they're facing this.
This is still not quite at the
phase where
we're seeing it effective in,
say, lung cancer,
and prostate cancer, and breast
cancer and
the major cancers that so many
people face.
JEFFREY BLUESTONE, CEO, Parker
Institute for
Cancer Immunotherapy: Well,
actually, we have
made a tremendous amount of
progress, for
instance, in lung cancer.
These so-called immune drugs,
these checkpoint
inhibiters, are now treating a
lot of non-small
cell lung cancers with great
success, in 30
to 40 to 50 percent response
rate, so very
high, as in melanoma, as in some
head and
neck cancer.
Yes, there are a lot of cancers
we still have
a long ways to go, but in some
of the cancers
you mentioned, we have actually
made tremendous
progress.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's great
to hear.
Matt Richtel, you have covered
this.
You have chronicled people who
have fought
through their cancers, had this
sort of immunotherapy
work, and also some who haven't.
What are some of the
shortcomings or limitations?
MATT RICHTEL, The New York
Times: Yes.
First of all, that was a
marvelous piece that
captured just how remarkable
this science
is on the very edge of life and
death.
And you have asked a great
question.
And the answer is the very thing
that makes
this therapy so potentially
powerful or powerful
also causes some challenges.
And that is this.
When you soup up or unleash the
immune system,
you have an opportunity to have
it attack
healthy organs, healthy cells.
And so sometimes you see very
challenging
stories where a cancer -- a
tumor will disappear,
but the person will become sick
with the equivalent
of an autoimmune disorder.
And, in fact, we have with Dr.
Bluestone just
an amazing authority to probably
elaborate
on that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mr. Bluestone,
go ahead.
JEFFREY BLUESTONE: Yes.
So, I think that what Matt said
is absolutely
true.
The immune system is an
incredibly powerful
force.
It's designed to recognize
everything that
is foreign.
And in the process of doing
that, and when
you unleash it the way these new
drugs do,
you can often, not that often,
rare compared
to the response rate get these
autoimmune
diseases.
At UCSF, we have had several
cases in the
last couple years of patients
who developed
type 1 diabetes, an autoimmune
disease that
causes the destruction of your
insulin-producing
cells.
And trying to understand how to
control these
side effects is one of the key
areas for the
Parker Institute, at UCSF as
well.
And so the goal here is to have
this unleashing
of the immune system, which is
key to eliminating
the cancer, while moderating
this unwanted
attack on your own tissues.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Matt Richtel,
with all of
the different scientists that
you have spoken
to, where are we in this arc?
Some of the people who have been
profiled
in your story say this is almost
like where
NASA engineers were in the '60s.
MATT RICHTEL: Yes.
I love that comparison, and I
have heard various
ones along the same lines.
I can't tell you how wide the
breadth of potential
is.
It's somewhere on the continuum
from, you
know, marvel of science to
change the world.
Here's what I mean, and then I
will answer
your question directly.
Absolutely, we are seeing at
least a marvel
of science, in that people who
were not previously
savable from cancer are being
saved.
That alone is marvelous.
On the change-the-world end of
the continuum,
we're certainly not there yet,
but the potential
exists to attack one of the
biggest killers
in the world.
We have done away with a lot of
the low-hanging
fruit of what kills us through
things like
antibiotics.
So now cancer, which many people
never survived
to even get, is the second
leading killer
in this country.
It could change the world if
this hangs on.
Why are we just still at the
beginnings of
that?
Because, as Jeff -- as Dr.
Bluestone underscored
and as lots of scientists have
told me at
this point, we can't yet tell if
more people
will either suffer side effects
or relapse
ultimately than we know of now.
And it's so early on that we
just can't answer
that question and we probably
won't be able
to for a decade or so.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeffrey
Bluestone, is that
about the right timeline?
There are still those hurdles,
as we heard
in the piece, that the drugs are
still expensive,
that there are still lots of
nonresponsive
patients.
And then, as you mentioned, how
do you calibrate
the immune system per patient,
so that it
doesn't kind of go overboard and
attack what
we need to survive?
JEFFREY BLUESTONE: Yes, we're
certainly at
absolutely the change inflection
point.
The world has changed for cancer
therapy with
immunotherapy.
It's hard to even explain how
different this
approach is.
Instead of using poisons to kill
cancer or
to wipe out the cancer cell,
we're actually
using our own body to do this.
So, in this kind of
transformational science,
there's a lot to learn.
We have to learn, what are the
fundamental
rules?
And we have to learn how to
moderate the drugs
in a way that maximize the
efficacy and minimize
the toxicity.
But I cannot imagine that, over
the next 10
years, we don't start see a
dramatic change
in the long-term survival of
many of the patients
with many of the cancers.
You have already seen it in
melanoma.
We have gone from 5 percent
five-year survival
to 40 percent five-year
survival.
We have seen it in certain lung
cancers.
So, yes, we're right at the
beginning.
But we're already seeing a
dramatic change
in a lot of these patients.
And I believe this new science
-- and it truly
is -- bringing together the
science of the
immune system and immunology
with the science
of cancer in ways that we could
never have
believed we would be at, at this
point.
So, sure, I'm optimistic.
I'm excited.
I'm -- every day I go to work, I
just can't
believe we're in this world we
live in now.
(CROSSTALK)
MATT RICHTEL: Could I just
underscore something
Dr. Bluestone said?
You mentioned I have chronicled
patients.
One of them was a good high
school friend
named Jason Greenstein.
And when Dr. Bluestone says
treatments have
changed, let me just tell you a
quick anecdote
that underscores how much.
Over several years, this friend
of mine, Jason,
went through the traditional
chemotherapy.
And it ate him alive, just as
chemotherapy
can do, because you're giving
someone toxins.
Over the course of literally
weeks when he
took an immunotherapy drug, you
could watch
what was like a pumpkin-sized
tumor in his
back disappear by the day in
picture after
picture.
And so that's the kind of
quantum leap.
Now, ultimately, he -- my friend
succumbed.
But that's the kind of quantum
change that
Dr. Bluestone is describing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Matt Richtel
of The New York Times, Jeffrey
Bluestone of
UCSF and the Parker Institute,
thanks so much.
MATT RICHTEL: Thank you.
JEFFREY BLUESTONE: Thank you.
AUDIE CORNISH: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
For more than 60 years, British
researchers
have monitored changes in the
world's atmosphere
from a remote lab in Antarctica.
Now, for the first time ever,
this facility
will close, at least
temporarily, to protect
the safety of its residents.
The "NewsHour"'s Julia Griffin
explains.
JULIA GRIFFIN: At the bottom of
our planet,
on top of more than 400 feet of
ice, sits
a state-of-the-art research
station called
Halley VI.
DAVID VAUGHAN, Director of
Science, British
Antarctic Survey: It's an
extraordinary place
to be, sitting in this, what
feels like a
large ship on the ice, looking
out across
the vast expanse of essentially
nothingness.
JULIA GRIFFIN: David Vaughan is
director of
science for British Antarctic
Survey, which
runs Halley VI.
DAVID VAUGHAN: The science that
we do at Halley
isn't just about exploring.
It's actually making
measurements that really
inform how we interact with our
planet, about
the risk of severe space weather
storms that
might knock out our satellite
GPS systems.
It's about looking at the
emissions of carbon
dioxide and methane at the last
place on Earth
that is seeing those emissions.
JULIA GRIFFIN: To do that,
Halley VI is a
feat of engineering in one of
the most extreme
environments.
Its eight interlocking pods
shield up to 70
researchers and support staff
from freezing.
Special hydraulic legs lift the
pods as snow
accumulates, and when the time
comes, the
pods can be towed on their
ski-like feet.
DAVID VAUGHAN: The ice shelf
itself moves.
So if we're going to maintain
the same geographical
position, we have to be able to
move across
the ice.
JULIA GRIFFIN: Another reason
they might want
to move?
Should that ice shelf threaten
to become an
iceberg.
This summer -- yes, it's summer
in the Southern
Hemisphere -- Halley VI was
already being
towed 15 miles inland to avoid
this decades-old
chasm, when a new, nearly
30-mile-long crack
opened suddenly on its other
side.
DAVID VAUGHAN: The crack that
you are seeing
goes all the way down to the
ocean.
And if you can look deep enough
in there,
you would see seawater.
Really, the potential
interaction between
those two cracks and how then
the ice shelf
would respond as a whole, that
we actually
find very unpredictable.
JULIA GRIFFIN: The agency has
decided to vacate
the station altogether before
winter.
DAVID VAUGHAN: In the summer, we
have the
opportunity to remove people
relatively rapidly
from the station, but, during
the winter,
when it is cold and dark and
stormy for many
months at a time, that's the
point at which
we would find it quite hard to
get people
out.
JULIA GRIFFIN: While other ice
shelves on
the Antarctic Peninsula have
been impacted
by climate change, Vaughan
thinks this might
be part of a natural cycle.
DAVID VAUGHAN: Maybe the ice
shelf will go
back to a new equilibrium in
time, but, at
the moment, we just can't
predict with any
certainty how long that will
take.
JULIA GRIFFIN: This marks the
first time scientists
will be removed from a Halley
station.
British Antarctic Survey hopes
they will return
next November.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Julia Griffin,
slightly warmer in Arlington,
Virginia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nice place to
take a vacation.
AUDIE CORNISH: Right, only
slightly warmer.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Our job hunting columnist
weighs in on
why you should always try to
make a personal
contact with a hiring manager.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
AUDIE CORNISH: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: Making Sense of how
the Trump
presidency is affecting the
Trump brand.
I'm Audie Cornish.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.